To summarize all the articles that have been read, most of course deal with big data and shows 
how new technologies and big data could bring in our society and especially in certain aspects 
of our life, which today seems to us banal, but before that was a big revolution, for example, the 
fact of taking an appointment, before tut being done almost manually, then the new machines 
made their appearances, now, the machine makes part of the work of man.  Today, new 
technologies are constantly evolving, and algorithms are more efficient, faster and more 
accurate.  
Thanks to certain computer languages such as DCAI, which are not algorithms, but languages, 
artefacts that allow to collect large data and translate them to give value, which allows 
increasing the performance of an activity for example, a company that collects large data, must 
process and develop it so that the services offered are efficient and ensure the best possible 
service. But this is sobering, because it is no longer about collecting data, it is now about relying 
on data quality, hence the engineers who are trying to develop increasingly sophisticated 
algorithms, so much so that they manage to develop their own languages, their own algorithms.  
Other companies take advantage of big (data) to make forecasts, this is called forward-looking 
forecasts, using current or past data, we manage to make forecasts to anticipate customer 
needs, future situations, future opportunities, and strategies, with the aim of being better, or 
surpassing customers. Now let’s move on to the technical part: for example, big data in the 
fashion industry: the internet represents an incredible strength and a revolution because it 
combines strength and human intelligence and technology. Symbolically, it refers to four names: 
volume, speed, variety, and quality. All these types of data that the company will collect will be 
analysed upstream. But these data need to be verified since each service in a company is 
different, each situation is unique, the same for problems.  So we should take into account a 
very high level of customization and add as a constraint that the request must be personalized. 
This is called the referral system: with collected data, we will compare the data of the new 
customer and see if there is a match (see similarities between the data and guess what the new 
customer can potentially like.)  From this stage, the data in fashion will be categorized by their 
nature ( those that will give a kind of flowchart 
Then the system will combine the knowledge based on the recommendation system, and a 
search engine, so the customer can write their query helped with the recommender system in 
order to get the product to their liking and eliminate  all the cold start issues. 
However, there is no system that protects itself from any danger, the designer must simply 
remain vigilant with the data they handle, establish rigorous standards and rules in terms of 
safety (maturity of the person, skills required for programming, knowledge of rules and penalties 
in case of fraud, reporting to competent authorities and approved by the State)
